---
title: "Brideshead Revisited"
date: 2020-11-15T17:03:06Z
---

My first serious foray into reading again this year was on a recommendation of a friend, Evelyn Waugh’s ‘Brideshead Revisited’. I’ve heard of Evelyn Waugh, and picked up Brideshead Revisited as my first experience with his writing (maybe against some of the advice from more seasoned readers of Waugh).
Waugh, an Oxford educated journalist and satirist, is best known for Brideshead Revisited (1945) and his earlier novel Decline and Fall (1928). A well known socialite through the 30s, and religious convert after divorcing his first wife, Waugh is an author who’s success mostly came in a golden period pre-war. Following his service in the Royal Marines during the Second World War, Waugh’s religious faith, fundamentalism and disillusionment with the sweeping social changes introduced in the post-war era grew, subjects he wrote extensively about during later years of his life. The publishing of Brideshead Revisited in 1945 brought him both fame and fortune, and Waugh continued to write autobiographically, as well as about his times travelling and experiences during the war, up to his death in 1966. During the later years of his career his writings were in decline, and his popularity waning, however his works gained a new appreciation and following in the years after his death. The novel follows the life of Charles' Ryder and his relationship with Sebastian Flyte, as well as Sebastian's wider family. There are strong themes of Catholicism, aristoracy, nostalgia and reconciliation throughout the book, which contains a heavy autobiographical element. 

The novels main narrative is introduced through Charles’ recollection of his earlier years while visiting Brideshead as a soldier during the war, initially launching into a chronological recollection fo the major events of Charles life; beginning as he begins his first term at Oxford University. At Oxford, Charles meets Sebastian Flyte, who introduces him to a wider group of socialites. These early recollections of Charles’ introduction to Sebastian mirror (albeit from an outside perspective) Waugh’s own experiences of ‘The Hypocrites Club’, an Oxford social group with stark parallels to Charles’ relationship with Anthony Blaunche and his group of friends. This is far from the only autobiographical element in the novel, but it’s inclusion as a the commencement of Charles’ story lays out a self-reflective theme which follos the protagonist throughout the duration. As a bildungsroman of sorts, and with wider themes of spiritual development, conversion and reconciliation, the book represents an illustration on some of the major themes of the authors own life, including his relationship with the church and spirituality, romantic relationships and the past. 

Brideshead Revisited is grounded almost entirely in the melancholy, in a romanticised lust for a past time or life. Much of this is reflected through Charles’ original years at Oxford (a time of great formulation and development) and his early experiences at Brideshead, before it’s beauty is unavoidably corrupted by the intrapersonal relationships he explores there over the narrative. At it’s conclusion, the novel’s namesake represents something entirely different, a symbol of a crumbling age of aristocrats in a world fighting for both its identity and morality. With each return to Brideshead, Charles finds it in a more diminished state than his last departure, concluding with it’s use as a battalion headquarters during the war. This collapse seeps through the book, and holds some parallels to the collapse of the Flyte’s faith. This is reflected again in the title of the first book, ‘Et In Arcadia Ego’, a 15th century painting by Nicolas Poussin traditionally associated with ideas of the rural idyll and idealized pastoral settings. N.B. The painting is hanging in the Louvre (I’ve been!) and is well worth a look if you’re ever there. This sense of melancholy is aided by the position of Charles as narrator, looking wistfully backwards on a life lived in the confines of Brideshead and Oxford. There’s an obvious question again here with Waugh’s own resistance to change, both within wider society and the world as a whole. Charles’ own recollections on an early life spent among the towering monuments of Britain’s aristocracy reflect this.

Much like Brideshead, the novels various characters stand at their intellectual and personal peaks at the novels opening, with the various characters all entering stages of discontent, addiction and struggle throughout their lives. For some, this process is almost immediate, with Anthony Blaunche (in some manner Charles’ introduction to the flamboyance of the aristocracy and life at Oxford) being sent down from Oxford at the close of the first book. This decline is often used as a vessel for themes of faith and reconciliation, something seen particularly through the various plights of the Flytes, but also through Sebastian. “Bridey”, or Lord Marchmain, is distant from both family and faith throughout the novel, only to reconcile with Catholicism on his deathbed. This holds parallels with Sebastian, who despite his estrangement from western society and struggles with addition, ultimately spends his final days in a monastery. Julia and Cordelia, the two daughters of Lord and Lady Marchmain, almost represent opposing views of the same spectrum, not dissimilarly to their parents. Cordelia, initially youthful and refreshing in Brideshead, ultimately comes to almost entirely represent the organised Catholicism. Julia is perhaps more of a modernist representative of the contemporary views of the day, refusing the allow the faith pushed onto her by her mother to act as the defining influence in her life. This opposition is ultimately futile though as she (not dissimilarly to her father) ultimately rejects marriage to the long love of her life in order to preserve what connection she maintains with her faith. The reconnection of Lord Marchmain's faith on his deathbed is perhaps the most notable, nominaly due to his position both at the head of his family and it's influence on Charles and Julia's life. The quetion of reconcilliation here also comes with some retrospective on the outcome of Sebastian's life, and ultimately untimely death. If Lord Marchmain has found this reconiliation earlier, instead of indulging in his adulterous and disconnected family life, could Sebastian have been saved from the vices which plagued his life? There's scope here for an extended criticism of the changing social and political landscape of the postwar years (particularly with regard to family life, family values and the role of men in society), as well as some of the further commentary both from Waugh and his later novels on his general disillusionment with the changing social landscapes of Britain during the inter-war years. 

Charles’ own struggles with faith are touched upon through the novel, though his conversion to Catholicism is confirmed. In some sense, Charles rejection of Catholicism is never total, nor is his acceptance, however it’s impact on his life is marked. There is a strong implication that the disillusionment Charles feels throughout most of his life, and ultimate loss of what might’ve been his final happiness at the hands of Julia’s reconciliation, are plights which he might himself have avoided given a stronger faith. While Charles never truly accepts his faith, at least overtly, there are clear parallels to the struggles Waugh faced throughout his own life.


While the novel is steeped in both religious and social commentary, something which I could continue to lament on far past the point of boredom, perhaps the more interesting interpretations of the Brideshead in the modern day is one of nostalgia and melancholy, both for the characters and the place of English aristocracy in pre-war Britain. There’s a serious sense in the novel that Charles and Sebastian (who themselves explore a romantic, if not intimate, relationship over the course of the novel) capture an almost perfect moment in time during their first term at Oxford, and first summer at Brideshead. While Sebastian is initially absolute in not introducing Charles to his family, he later invites him to Brideshead for the summer having suffered a riding accident. The aesthetic of this summer, both in the beauty of Brideshead, as yet skin-deep disfunction of Sebastian’s family, and intimate relationship between them, capture what one might see as the happiest period of Charles’ life. As the narrative continues, Sebastian’s death, Julia’s reconciliation (as well as first illegitimate marriage), and Charles’ general ill-excitement with his prospects in life (despite relative success as a renowned architectural painter), all contribute to a sense of almost loss for what was briefly an almost idyllic perception of life among the English Aristocracy. This nostalgia, both personal and for the wider view of the ‘Golden Age’ of early-century England, is ultimately corrupted by everything from the advancing social change of the early 20th Century (perhaps explored within contemporary reactions to Charles and Sebastian's relationship) to the wider degradation of organised religion and perceived lack of both respect and appreciation for ‘Old England’. This is most poignant at the novels introduction, as Brideshead is used as a battalion headquarters while war rages across Europe. This almost mirrors traditional interpretations of the pastoral, supported by the aforementioned title of the first book, with the briefly captured idyll of the novels namesake being briefly captured, but ultimately destroyed.


